Ayelet: Hi. So I understand you work in the Technion. That's just like geniuses there, right?

student: Not geniuses. A lot of students that work very hard. Do you know someone from the Technion that's doing a PhD or...

Ayelet: Well, the smartest person in my class became an engineer. So that's why I know it's like for smart people. So you must be really smart also.

student: Yeah, I agree with you. I am in a less smarter field.

student: It's a joke in the Technion that we're not as smart as the other faculties. What?

Ayelet: You mean you're in architecture?

student: We're considered even below architecture.

student: The bottom of the battle of the Technion geniuses.

Ayelet: That's education. That's why I am.

student: Problem.

Ayelet: It's a problem.

student: So what do you do there? So I'm a PhD candidate at the Tamar's Lab in the medicine faculty.

student: And my lab is focusing on the inherited retinal diseases.

student: Do you know what is the retina?

Ayelet: It's something in the eye, right? So it's like a disease that goes from in the family, right?

student: Right, right, right. The memory of inherited, good. You pay attention to the biology class.

Ayelet: I took five points in high school.

student: But they know all the things that I'm going to do.

student: So the retina is the layer that enables us to see. And inherited retinal diseases, as you said, it's a disease that passes in the family. From one generation to another.

student: A lot of people affected over 14,000 people around the world. That's not a lot. I mean, it's a small number. Of a higher percentage.

student: In Israel, there's a lot. Yeah. One to one.

student: One. One thousand people.

Ayelet: How come we have more in Israel? Why?

student: We have two main reasons.

student: First of all, we have a strong founder's effect.

Ayelet: What founder effect?

student: So when you're doing genetic testing for pregnancy, you need to say your background and your husband. Like Ashkenazi or Yemen. Yes. So the population that they were very...

student: Distant and married by themselves developed this founder's effect. This is how it goes. And they shared a similar alleles pool. Do you know what is an allele? Like genes? Yes.

student: Mutated genes. Yes. You can say.

Ayelet: So because it was a small group, they all married each other. And there's a lot of genes. Right. The mutated ones. Right.

student: Good one. And the next...

student: And in some other groups in Israel, we have a high relative marriage. So basically like in founder's effect, they share the same pool. So we are... Related. Like people who are related, the cousins are getting hurt. Yes. Exactly. So do you meet someone blind?

Ayelet: My mother had huge glasses. Is that... Is that connected or is it something else?

student: So it's not the same because when people are affected, the cells that we can perceive vision with them are dying and they can't like duplicate or something like that. So even if you have glasses, it doesn't help? It doesn't help. Yeah. Okay. One of the challenges in this field that we don't have like a good treatment for people. We have one biological treatment for only one gene and we have over than 3000 genes. So it's a really big problem. And another problem is that we can't diagnose everyone. We can't genetically diagnose everyone with their mutated gene.

Ayelet: But why is it important to know which gene is the problem?

Ayelet: Anyway you don't have a cure. That's right.

student: But for a lot of people... It's like they know what's wrong with them. It's giving them some peace. A lot of people are afraid that this disease will pass to their children or their grandchildren. So we can...

student: They can go to genetic counseling. Yeah.

